“Describe your greatest academic achievement, and why this is a particular source of pride for you.” (700 words maximum)

Vinci Lombardi, a famous American Football Coach, once said, “A quitter never wins and a winner never quits”. We all have heard of this saying at least once in our lives. And we all have had the opportunity to apply it to a part of our lives. I also have faced many situations that have forced me to take this hard decision. But through the short life that I have lived, one situation that really stretched me to the limit was when I was preparing for the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE).

I had always been a bright student and had topped my school in both the Board Examinations. Coming from a lower middle-class family, I was never able to afford any extra help, like tuitions or guides, for my studies and depended more on self-study and hard work to succeed. So, when the time for giving the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) came, I again depended on the same strategy of self-study. JEE is one of the most competitive and difficult entrance examination in the world, with around 500,000 students vying for around 10,000 seats in India’s premiere engineering institutions, Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs).

JEE was scheduled just 2 weeks after my board examinations and as such I couldn’t get much time to revise and prepare well for the examination. Still I had confidence in myself. With this confidence I gave JEE and with the same confidence I logged into the portal to check the results. To my shock the results said, “No rank”. This meant I was not in the final merit list of 15000 candidates and was thus awarded no rank. I didn’t expect a very high rank but no getting any rank really crushed me.

But this was not the end. I had now an even more difficult task of deciding what to do next. I could either wait one more year to prepare for JEE again or join some other engineering college. Most of the people suggested that I shouldn’t waste another year and should take admission in some other college as there is no guarantee I would secure a good rank next year. Faced with this difficult choice, I decided that I have always believed in myself and will continue to do the same. So I dropped a year and prepared for JEE.

It was the most gruelling year of my life. I had gotten a 90% scholarship at one of the coaching centres and attended their classes and tests. I also dedicated a lot of time to self-study as I always believed the best learning happens when a person sits by himself and concentrates on the task at hand. So, this led to spending of around 10-12 hours each day studying. The only off-time was an hour in the evening for playing cricket. Slowly and steadily I began to get a grasp of things and my performance began to improve. Within few months I was securing top ranks in various mock tests.

After a year of learning and hard work I finally gave the JEE again. And then the day of the result came. I opened the website and checked my result and to my satisfaction I had secured 732 rank in the examination. I had come from securing no rank to 732 rank in a year. I felt happy but I wasn’t overjoyed or jumping with happiness. I was more satisfied. A years hard work had come off and I felt pride in the way I had applied myself and never gave up. For me the journey was more important than the destination. 

I finally got admitted to one of India’s leading engineering institution, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur. But that one year of preparation taught me the most. I not only gained academic knowledge but also developed as an individual. I became much more focused and strong willed. I also learnt that patience is very important if one wants to succeed. The way I had stuck to the plan and never quit was the thing that made me the proudest. It also gave me the confidence that whatever be the situation, I can overcome it as long as I gave my 100%.
