“Describe the time when you had the most impact as a leader.” (700 words maximum)

One of the most difficult situations I have ever faced during my time working at Citi was when I worked on a project for Citi Hong Kong. It was a project aimed at automating the settlement of mismatched trades for the Hong Kong business of Citi. I led a four-member team for developing and implementing the solution.

Initially, the work went smoothly and after four months of good work, we were on course to deliver the project on time. But three weeks before the go-live date we got a request from Operations that we would have to include some additional changes and without these changes, the project cannot go-live. After reviewing and analyzing the suggested changes I estimated that the change required around four weeks of work to implement and around a week to test. With only three weeks left to go-live, I suggested Operations to exclude the change from the current release and postpone it for the next release. This would give us ample time to implement the change. But Operations team was adamant that the change be included in the current release only. They were not ready to use the current solution without their changes and as the project was already assigned to the current release so postponing it would have affected the performance metric of the team.

I was even offered additional resources to expedite the development work. But since this was a very complex project and required a thorough understanding of the process to implement, so making the new resources understand the process would have taken more than a week. Thus, I took the decision of not involving additional resources in the development work. Instead, I assigned these resources for carrying out all the non-development work like testing, deployment, and environment configuration. This freed up the developers to focus only on developing the solution.

This strategy still required the four people already working on the project to put in extra efforts to deliver the change on time. I divided the change into separate components and assigned them to me and the other three developers. Components were divided and assigned in such a way that each developer got to work on things similar to what they had already developed in the project. This helped in better reuse of work already done and thus reduced the time required for developing the solution.

The team had around two and a half weeks to implement the solution and every person was putting in extra efforts to complete the work on time. But after around a week another problem arose when one of the developers, Shivam, came to me and told me that he would be taking two days of leave. Loosing a developer for two days would have meant failure in going live on the agreed date. This would have also put the project on hold till the next release. 

So I talked to Shivam and tried to inquire whether there was an emergency for which he was taking such a sudden leave and whether he can delay the leave to a later date. Shivam seemed frustrated and was not ready to explain much. He had joined Citi a year back and was still not accustomed to working under pressure. I talked to him and explained the importance of completing what one starts. I also reminded him of the good work he had put in the project and how it might get wasted if the project is not delivered on time. I also told him to come to me whenever he faces any difficulty or is feeling under pressure. Shivam finally agreed to postpone his leave and continued to work on the project.

After two and half weeks of grueling work we were finally able to deliver the project on time. The project resulted in the reduction of the process completion time from 10 hours to 8 hours and led to the saving of 2 FTE (Full-time Equivalent). The project also helped me develop as a leader and taught me the importance of being flexible and ready to innovate. I was also able to learn how to better support other people in the team to help them achieve their potential.
